IT IS TEST FOR
AND I'M GOING TO CALL TO ORDER
THE SEPTEMBER 30TH MEETING
OF THE ANN ARBOR INDEPENDENT
COMMUNITY POLICE OVERSIGHT
COMMISSION.
>> I THANK YOU ALL FOR COMING.
WE'RE GOING TO FIRST HAVE OUR
ROLL CALL IS COMMENTS PLEASE TO
YOUR CADRE HERE VICE CHAIR
OFMAN HERE.
>> COMMISSIONER MILGROM HERE.
COMMISSIONER BLUE PRESENT
COMMISSIONER MAINLY HERE.
>> COMMISSIONER COOPER.
COMMISSIONER HAINS.
COMMISSIONER GREEN COMMISSIONER
PIPKINS COUNCIL MEMBER HARRISON
COUNCIL MEMBER IRA, WE HAVE A.
>> THANK YOU.
WE DO EXPECT OTHER
COMMISSIONERS TO BE PRESENT.
>> I'M GOING TO ASK THE
COMMISSIONERS TO PLEASE LOOK AT
THE AGENDA.
YOU CAN SEE THAT WE HAVE A
SPECIAL ITEM EARLY ON ON THE
AGENDA AND ALSO THE MINUTES AND
THEN I'M GOING TO ASK FOR
APPROVAL OF BOTH BEFORE WE MOVE
ANY FURTHER.
>> LET'S DO THAT EARLIER TO
TAKE JUST A MINUTE
.
SO I'M GOING TO CALL CAN I HAVE
A MOTION TO APPROVE THIS
EVENING'S AGENDA PLEASE?
>> IN A SECOND SECOND, OK.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
ANY COMMENTS OR QUESTIONS ABOUT
THE AGENDA ALL IN FAVOR
OF APPROVING THE AGENDA OF ANY
OPPOSED.
>> THANK YOU WITH REGARD TO THE
MINUTES FROM OUR LAST MEETING.
CAN I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE?
>> I'M A MINUTES FROM THE LAST
MEETING.
THANK YOU.
IS THERE A SECOND SECOND.
ANY DISCUSSION ALL IN FAVOR?
I THANK YOU AGAIN.
I WANT TO WELCOME EVERYONE WHO
HAS COME OUT THIS EVENING.
MANY OF US WELL, I WANT TO I
WANT TO WELCOME EVERYONE I SEE
WE HAVE THE THE CHAIR AND I
THINK VICE CHAIR OF THE HUMAN
RIGHTS COMMISSION ARE WITH US.
WE THANK YOU FOR COMING OUT
WITHIN THE LAST FEW WEEKS WE
HAVE SEEN TWICE AN ARTICLE
PUBLISHED IN THE ANN ARBOR
NEWS THAT DEALT WITH THE
DRIVING EQUALITY ORDINANCE AND
WHAT HAPPENED AFTER THE DRIVING
EQUALITY ORDINANCE WAS PASSED
AND WE BELIEVE THIS TO BE A
VERY IMPORTANT MATTER ACCORDING
TO THE ANN ARBOR NEWS .
FOLLOW WING, THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE DRIVING EQUALITY
ORDINANCE WHICH YOU MAY KNOW
PROHIBITED POLICE TRAFFIC STOPS
FOR MINOR VIOLATIONS.
THE IDEA WAS THAT SOMETIMES A
MINOR VIOLATION OR CLAIM THAT
THERE WAS A MINOR VIOLATION CAN
LEAD TO AN INTERACTION THAT
ULTIMATELY TAKES A WRONG TURN.
>> I THINK THAT IT WAS
APPROPRIATE FOR IPAC TO SAY
LET'S TAKE A FEW MINUTES AS
LONG AS WE WE HAVE TO LOOK AT
THE ISSUE AND WE'VE INVITED AND
I KNOW COUNCILPERSON HARRISON
WILL BE HERE SHE SPONSORED THE
DRIVING EQUALITY ORDINANCE
INITIALLY AND I THINK SHE IS
PREPARED TO SAY A FEW WORDS TO
US.
AND WE'VE ALSO INVITED ANN
ARBOR POLICE CHIEF ANDRE
ANDERSON TO SPEAK TO US THIS
EVENING.
>> YOU KNOW, I THINK BECAUSE
OF THE HISTORY IN THIS COUNTRY
OF BLACK FOLKS BEING STOPPED ON
THE STREETS, THIS GOES BACK A
CENTURY AT LEAST I KNOW
PERSONALLY MY FATHER WAS
STOPPED OUT IN FRONT OF OUR
HOUSE BRINGING IN THE HOS AFTER
HE HAD WATERED THE LAWN.
THEY MADE HIM GO INSIDE AND
PROVE THAT HE LIVED THERE.
MY BROTHER WAS STOPPED ON THE
WAY HOME FROM WAYNE STATE
UNIVERSITY CARRYING HIS
BRIEFCASE.
MY SON STOPPED LEAVING A
BASKETBALL GAME AT PIONEER HIGH
SCHOOL.
SO THESE ARE IMPORTANT ISSUES
AND IF INDEED BLACK MOTORISTS
ARE BEING STOPPED MORE OFTEN
THAN SHOULD BE, IT'S SOMETHING
WE THINK IS FITTING FOR XPAC TO
LOOK INTO.
AND SO WE HAVE INVITED AND I
ASSUMING SOME OF YOU CAME OUT
BECAUSE OF THE ISSUE AND WE
WILL HAVE TIME FOR PUBLIC
COMMENT IF ANYONE WISHES TO
COMMENT AFTER OUR PRESENTATION.
SO I'M GOING TO ASK
COUNCILPERSON CYNTHIA HARRISON
WHO IS ONE OF OUR LIAISONS TO
XPAC TO BEGIN OUR DISCUSSION
THIS EVENING ABOUT THE DRIVING
EQUALITY ORDINANCE AND WHAT
YOU'RE UNDERSTANDING AS TO
WHAT'S GOING ON AFTER IT WAS
IMPLEMENTED.
>> THANK YOU.
HELLO RETURN SO MY PART TODAY
IS A DISCUSSION AND SO I'LL
START WITH TALKING ABOUT WHY I
FELT IT WAS IMPORTANT TO BRING
AN ORDER AND ORDINANCE TO THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR ORDINANCE
BEING A LOCAL LAW WHILE I WAS
CAMPAIGNING DURING THE YEAR
TWENTY TWENTY TWO I TOOK MY
SEAT IN NOVEMBER TWENTY TWENTY
TWO I WOULD SPEAK WITH
RESIDENTS AND YOU KNOW
INDIVIDUALS THAT LIVED HERE IN
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR AND SOME
WHO USED TO LIVE HERE IN THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR AND ALSO
THOSE WHO TRAVEL TO ANN ARBOR
THROUGH ANN ARBOR, WORK IN ANN
ARBOR, PLAY IN ANN ARBOR.
THEIR CHILDREN GO TO SCHOOL IN
ANN ARBOR.
PEOPLE THAT LOOK LIKE ME AND
YOU KNOW, I WOULD TALK TO THEM
ABOUT THEIR EXPERIENCE WHILE
BEING HERE IN ANN ARBOR AND
JUST LET ME BACK UP A LITTLE
BIT.
>> I SHOULD LET Y'ALL KNOW THAT
I'M A CRIMINAL LEGAL REFORM
ADVOCATE AND ALSO A POLICE
REFORM ADVOCATE.
>> SO THAT'S THE PLATFORM THAT
I RAN ON AND SO IT WAS REALLY
IMPORTANT TO ME TO HEAR WHAT
OTHER PEOPLE'S EXPERIENCE WAS
OTHER INDIVIDUALS THAT LOOK
LIKE ME AND YOU KNOW, I JUST
THE FEEDBACK I GOT I GOT
FEEDBACK THAT WAS NOT SO
POSITIVE ABOUT INDIVIDUALS
EXPERIENCE HERE OVER THE YEARS
WHILE OPERATING A VEHICLE IN
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
SO THAT PROMPTED ME TO LOOK
INTO WHAT OTHER JURISDICTIONS
AND MUNICIPALITIES AROUND THE
COUNTRY WERE DOING AND HOW THEY
WERE HANDLING SIMILAR
CIRCUMSTANCES WITHIN THEIR
JURISDICTIONS AND DID COME
ACROSS THE COUNCIL MEMBER
ISAIAH THOMAS AND PHILADELPHI,
PENNSYLVANIA AND HE HAD
CREATED A DRIVING EQUALITY THE
DRIVING EQUALITY ORDINANCE I
BELIEVE THE FIRST ONE IN THE
COUNTRY AND SO I BASICALLY
MODELED OURS AFTER THEIRS.
HOWEVER, OURS IS DIFFERENT.
>> I WORKED ALSO WITH THE
INSTITUTE OF JUSTICE, THE
ASSAEL ACLU AND YOU AND
OF COURSE OUR CITY STAFF, OUR
CITY ATTORNEY'S OFFICE TO CRAFT
THE DRIVING EQUALITY ORDINANCE
HERE FOR THE CITY OF VANCOUVER
.
THERE WAS, YOU KNOW, SOME
INDIVIDUALS THOUGHT I SHOULD DO
IT BY POLICY.
I PERSONALLY THOUGHT I SHOULD
DO IT BY A LOCAL LAW BECAUSE WE
KNOW THAT ADMINISTRATIONS
CHANGE AND LEADERSHIP CHANGES
AND SO I THOUGHT IT WOULD BE
MOST EFFECTIVE TO DO LOCAL LAW
OR DO THIS BY ORDINANCE SO THAT
YOU KNOW, WHEN ADMINISTRATIONS
CHANGE WITHIN OUR POLICE
DEPARTMENT, THE LOCAL LAW WITH
THAT STILL LIVE ON BEYOND MY
TIME HERE BEYOND YOU THE
CURRENT WELL, THE
ADMINISTRATION WHO WAS IN
LEADERSHIP AT THE TIME AND THEN
AFTER THAT SO IN DOING SO WE WE
REALLY GOT THE COMMUNITY
INVOLVED.
WE IN TERMS OF WELL I GUESS I
DID IN TERMS OF SPEAKING WITH
COMMUNITY MEMBERS THAT WE DID
BECAUSE IT WAS BY ORDINANCE WE
DID HAVE TWO PUBLIC HEARINGS
AND DURING THOSE PUBLIC
HEARINGS THERE WERE INDIVIDUALS
THAT FROM THE COMMUNITY THAT
CAME HERE IN FRONT OF COUNSEL
TO SHARE THEIR LIVED EXPERIENCE
AND I THOUGHT THAT THAT WAS
FIRST OF ALL WHEN WHEN FOLKS
ARE COMING HERE TO SPEAK AT TO
CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.
>> IT IS I KNOW FROM EXPERIENCE
THAT IT CAN BE YOU KNOW, IT CAN
BE NERVE WRACKING THING TO BE
VULNERABLE AND SPEAK, YOU KNOW,
BEFORE CITY COUNCIL ABOUT
PERSONAL THINGS THAT HAVE
IMPACTED YOU PERSONALLY.
SO YOU KNOW, COMMENDING THOSE
THAT DID COME OUT AND SHARE
THEIR STORY.
>> YOU KNOW, WE HAVE SO SORRY.
>> I'M JUST GOING IT KIND
OF LIKE GOING THROUGH GOING
THROUGH THE HISTORY AND OF WHY
I THOUGHT THIS WAS IMPORTANT.
>> I MYSELF HAVE IN MY LOVED
ONES HAVE HAD NOT SOME POSITIVE
EXPERIENCES WITH IT,
PARTICULARLY IN OUR IN OUR
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
>> THIS IS WHERE I'VE LIVED.
I WAS BORN AND RAISED HERE.
SO THAT'S A FACT THAT YOU KNOW,
I HAVE LOVED ONES THAT HAVE
BEEN NEGATIVELY IMPACTED BY
OVERPOLICING HERE IN THE CITY
OF IN ALBANY AND SO AS A MOTHER
OF BLACK MEN, BLACK YOUNG MEN,
BLACK MEN, I CAN TELL YOU THAT
WHEN YOUR CHILD CALLS YOU ON
THE PHONE BECAUSE THEY HAVE
THERE'S A POLICE OFFICER BEHIND
THEM OR THEY HAVE BEEN STOPPED
BY POLICE.
WHAT I CAN TELL YOU PERSONALLY
IS THAT THAT EXPERIENCE IS FOR
ME.
WELL, THAT THAT EXPERIENCE WAS
FOR ME EVERY TIME IT HAPPENED A
HEART WRENCHING MOMENT BECAUSE
WELL, I THINK YOU ALL KNOW WHY
BUT IN CASE YOU DON'T, I'LL
SHARE THAT HISTORICALLY.
UM, HISTORICALLY BLACK
INDIVIDUALS IN THE BLACK
COMMUNITY HAS BEEN VERY
NEGATIVELY IMPACTED BY, UH,
TRAFFIC STOPS AND THEY HAVE
BEEN KILLED AT TRAFFIC STOPS AS
THE RESULT OF A TRAFFIC STOP.
IF THEY HAVEN'T BEEN KILLED,
THEY'VE BEEN BEATEN AND UM IT'S
IT'S SOMETHING THAT AS WE SPEAK
WITH OTHER MOTHERS HERE, THE
CITY OF AND OVER AND AROUND THE
COUNTRY, IT IS SOMETHING THAT
IS THAT THAT IS VERY IT'S IT'S
NOT FUN AND SHORT AND YOU KNOW
WHAT I COULD SAY ABOUT A CHILD
IN YOUR HOUSEHOLD GETTING THEIR
DRIVER'S LICENSE IS REALLY IT
IS A IT IS A RITE OF PASSAGE
WHEN A CHILD IN YOUR HOME IS
GETS THEIR DRIVER'S LICENSE, IT
CAN YOU KNOW IT THEY HAVE ALL
IN THIS NEWFOUND INDEPENDENCE.
>> UM, IT'S YOU KNOW THE IT'S I
SAY BITTERSWEET FOR THE BLACK
COMMUNITY BECAUSE THE SWEET
PART OF IT IS PERHAPS MOM AND
DAD DON'T HAVE TO PICK UP FROM
SCHOOL.
PERHAPS THEY DON'T HAVEO DO A
DRIVING TO YOU KNOW, GETTING
THE CHILD FROM SCHOOL TO TO
SPORTS OR TUTORING OR PRACTICE
OR WHATEVER IT IS WHATEVER
EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES THAT
CHILD IS PARTICIPATING IN.
AND SO IF THE FAMILY IS
FORTUNATE ENOUGH TO PROVIDE A
VEHICLE UP THERE, YOU KNOW,
ABLE TO PROVIDE A VEHICLE FOR
THEIR CHILD TO TO GET AROUND
SOMETIMES THAT CHILD HAS A
YOUNGER CHILD THAT THEY CAN
PICK UP FROM SCHOOL AND IT
REALLY SAVES CAN SAVE THE
MOTHER OR FATHER OR GRANDMOTHER
OR WHOEVER IS RAISING THOSE
CHILDREN SOME TIME.
WHAT I CAN'T TELL YOU IS THE
BITTER SWEET THE BITTER PART
OF THAT IN THE BLACK COMMUNITY
IS THAT IT BECAUSE IT'S ALSO A
SCARY TIME IN THE BLACK
COMMUNITY AT DINNER TABLES
OF BLACK FAMILIES AROUND THE
COUNTRY WE HAVE DISCUSSIONS AND
WE HAVE WHAT'S CALLED THE TALK
AND SO MANY OF YOU PROBABLY
FAMILIAR WITH THAT.
IT IS WHERE WE HAVE TO, YOU
KNOW, TELL OUR CHILDREN EXACTLY
WHAT THEY HAVE TO DO IF A
POLICE OFFICER STOPS THEM WHERE
THEIR HANDS NEED TO BE ON THE
STEERING WHEEL THAT THEY MUST
COMMUNICATE TO THE OFFICER.
MY DOCUMENTATION IS HERE IN THE
GLOVE BOX.
>> CAN I REACH FOR IT?
DON'T REACH IN YOUR POCKET.
>> WE'VE WE'VE GOT ALL OF THESE
THINGS THAT WE NEED TO EDUCATE
OUR CHILDREN ABOUT AND THESE
DISCUSSIONS OFTENTIMES START
VERY EARLY IN LIFE.
THEY DON'T I MEAN THEY START
OFTEN I MEAN IF YOU'VE GOT MORE
THAN ONE CHILD, SOMEONE OLDER,
YOU KNOW, THEY'RE DRIVING
FIRST.
ALL THIS IS JUST THIS IS JUST
SOMETHING A DISCUSSION THAT
HAPPENS IN THE BLACK COMMUNITY
AND I CAN TELL YOU THAT WHILE I
WORKED AT THE DRIVE EQUALITY
ORDINANCE AND WHILE I WAS
RESEARCHING AND YOU KNOW,
BASICALLY BUILDING IT, I DID
HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY AND IT
TOOK THE TIME TO SPEAK WITH MY
PEERS ON COUNCIL AND FOR THOSE
THAT DON'T LOOK LIKE ME, MY
WHITE PEERS, THEY HAVE THE
PRIVILEGE AND OF NOT HAVING HAD
TO HAVE THOSE CONVERSATIONS
WITH THEIR CHILDREN BEFORE THEY
GOT THEIR DRIVER'S LICENSE.
SO THAT'S ALSO WHEN I TALK
ABOUT YOU KNOW, THAT'S WHY I
SAY IT'S BITTERSWEET BECAUSE
IT'S LIKE THIS NEWFOUND FREEDOM
FOR THE CHILD.
BUT IT'S A REALLY SCARY IT CAN
ALSO BE A VERY SCARY TIME FOR
PARENTS WHEN WE KNOW OUR KIDS
ARE GOING TO BE BEHIND THE
WHEEL.
>> WE DO NOT WE DO KNOW THAT
THE PEOPLE THERE ARE TWO WAYS
THAT MOST PEOPLE COME INTO
CONTACT WITH POLICE OFFICERS
FOR THE FIRST TIME AND THAT'S
EITHER AT SCHOOL BECAUSE A
SCHOOL HAS A WHAT WE CALL AN
SRO WHICH IS A SCHOOL RESOURCE
OFFICER OR AS THE THE RESULT A
RESULT OF A TRAFFIC STOP.
>> SO IF IF FOLKS HAVEN'T HAD
ENCOUNTERS WITH POLICE BEFORE
THAT'S USUALLY THE WAY THEY
HAVE ENCOUNTERS WITH THE POLICE
FOR THE FIRST TIME IS AS A
RESULT OF SCHOOL OR A TRAFFIC
STOP.
>> SO I DON'T KNOW IF I'M IT'S
JUST KIND OF LIKE SHARING WITH
YOU.
YOU KNOW, BASICALLY THE REASON
THAT I KNOW THERE WAS DATA I
KNOW WE HAD DR. KEVIN KARPIAK
KARPIAK THAT THE IMU THAT WAS
WORKING ON SOMETHING AT THE
TIME THAT TO BE HONEST WITH YOU
IT WAS THE REASON I STARTED TO
WORK ON THIS WAS BECAUSE
OF WHAT I HEARD FROM FROM FROM
PEERS AND FROM PRESIDENTS AND
FOLKS THAT HAVE NOT HAD SUCH A
FUN TIME HERE IN THE CITY
OF INTERPRETOR.
>> SO WE SUCCESSFULLY PASSED
THE DRIVING EQUALITY ORDINANCE
UNANIMOUSLY TWO YEARS AGO AND
ONE THING THAT OCCURRED WITH
THE OR I'LL TELL YOU TALKED A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE TIMING
OF THE PASSAGE OF THE DRIVING
EQUALITY ORDINANCE BECAUSE
OF THE FOURTH OF JULY HOLIDAY.
IT ACTUALLY OUR COUNCIL MEETING
FELL ON THE SEVEN YEAR
ANNIVERSARY OF THE LANDEL
CASTILE'S MURDER OF HIS KILLING
AND THAT WAS KIND OF I JUST
COINCIDENCE OR WAS IT REALLY I
DON'T KNOW WAS IT BY
COINCIDENCE?
>> I BELIEVE IN FATE AND YOU
KNOW, I WATCHED WHILE WORKING
ON THE DRIVE EQUALITY ORDINANCE
I WATCHED THE RECORDING
OF ORLANDO CASTILE'S KILLING
AND HE WAS SHOT AND KILLED
WITHIN SECONDS AND IT WAS I
BELIEVE IT WAS A TAIL LIGHT
THAT WAS OUT.
HE WAS SHOT AND KILLED IN FRONT
OF HIS PARTNER AND HIS CHILD
THAT WAS IN THE BACK SEAT.
>> SO IN JULY JULY I BELIEVE
7TH OR JULY 6TH JUST A FEW
MONTHS GO WAS NINE YEAR
ANNIVERSARY OF HIS KILLING AND
SO THAT WAS I DON'T KNOW.
>> BUT DESPITE GOOSE BUMPS, YOU
KNOW, ALL OVER ME IN THE BACK
IN MY HAIR THE BACK OF MY NECK
STOOD UP AT THE THOUGHT OF YOU
KNOW, I WAS PASSING THIS
ORDINANCE ON AN ANNIVERSARY SO
WHAT I CAN SHARE WITH YOU THAT
OCCURRED HERE IN ANN ARBOR ONCE
WE PASSED THE DRIVE EQUALITY
ORDINANCE IS THAT YOU KNOW, WE
YOU KNOW, LOOKING AT ANY
NUMBERS RIGHT NOW BUT WE WE DID
SEE A LITTLE BIT OF A DECLINE
IN TRAFFIC STOPS.
WHAT WHAT I WILL SHARE BEFORE I
GET OFF INTO THAT.
AND BY THE WAY, PART OF MY
PRESENTATION IS MY SPECIAL
GUEST HERE, CHIEF ANDERSON, WHO
IS ALSO GOING TO YOU HAVE HIS
SAY ABOUT THE DRIVER EQUALITY
ORDINANCE.
>> ONE THING I TELL PEOPLE
ABOUT THE PROCESS OF PASSING
THE DRIVING EQUALITY ORDINANCE
IS THAT THAT WAS REALLY ONLY
THE FIRST PART
OF LIMITING NOT
UNNECESSARY CONTACT BETWEEN LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND CIVILIANS
BECAUSE THAT'S REALLY WHAT THIS
IS IS LIMITING YOU KNOW,
UNNECESSARY CONTACT BETWEEN LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND CIVILIANS.
I'LL SAY IT AGAIN THE SECOND
PART OF THE DRIVING EQUALITY
ORDINANCE IS THE IS THE
IMPLEMENTATION AND THAT IS THE
PHASE THAT WE'RE IN RIGHT NOW
EVEN TWO YEARS LATER IN ORDER
FOR US HERE AT THE CITY TO
IMPLEMENT THE DRIVING EQUALITY
ORDINANCE, WE FELT THAT WE HAD
TO WELL WE HAD TO USHER IN THE
RIGHT INDIVIDUAL THAT WAS GOING
TO CARRY THIS OUT LIKE MY JOB
WAS TO MY LEGISLATE.
>> WE PASSED RESOLUTIONS TO
PASS ORDINANCES AND SO MY ROLE
WAS THAT THAT WAS MY ROLE AND
THAT'S WITHIN MY PURVIEW AS A
CITY COUNCIL MEMBER.
>> BUT WE HAD TO MAKE SURE THAT
WE HAD SOMEBODY WHO WAS GOING
TO LEAD OUR POLICE DEPARTMENT
THAT ALIGNED WITH OUR VALUES
AND WAS GOING TO SEE THIS
PROCESS OUT OF LIMITING
UNNECESSARY CONTACT BETWEEN LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND CIVILIANS.
>> AND SO THAT'S WHAT WE DID.
>> WE USHERED IN AN INDIVIDUAL
THAT PRIOR TO I'M TOLD PRIOR TO
EVEN APPLYING DID THE RESEARCH
YOU KNOW, KNEW WHERE OUR VALUES
WERE, WHERE WE STOOD, MADE SURE
THAT WE WERE IN ALIGNMENT WITH
THEIR VALUES AND WE POST
PASSING THE DRIVING EQUALITY
ORDINANCE USHERED IN CHIEF
ANDRE ANDERSON AND SO HE IS THE
CHIEF OF POLICE AND HIS ROLE IS
TO CARRY OUT WHAT WE AT CITY
COUNCIL DIRECTED THE STAFF TO
DO AND SO HE COULD SPEAK WITH
YOU BETTER AND MORE ABOUT WHAT
HE DID ONCE HE TOOK HIS ONCE HE
STARTED HERE WHICH WAS IN
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR I BELIEVE IN
FEBRUARY TWENTY TWENTY THREE IN
FEBRUARY IS THAT RIGHT.
>> NO FOR TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
ALL THE YEARS ARE JUST LIKE
THEIR TWENTY TWENTY FOUR AND SO
I KNEW AS THE CHAMPION OF THE
DRIVE AND EQUALITY ORDINANCE
THAT IT WAS NOT GOING TO JUST
LIKE STOP OVERNIGHT.
>> SOME OF THESE JUST TICKY
TACKY WHAT WE CALL WHAT SOME
CALL PRETEXT STOPS EQUIPMENT
VIOLATION STOPS, EQUIPMENT
VIOLATION STOPS THAT ARE NOT
RELATED TO PUBLIC SAFETY
BECAUSE THE REASON I KNEW IT
WOULD NOT NECESSARILY HAPPEN
OVERNIGHT IS I'LL SAY IT I'VE
SAID IT BEFORE.
I'LL SAY IT RIGHT NOW THAT
CULTURE EATS POLICY FOR
BREAKFAST, LUNCH AND DINNER.
IT'S I KNOW WHAT I MEAN BY THAT
.
ANYBODY WANT TO SAY WHAT THAT
MEANS?
>> I MEAN I KNOW AND I THINK IT
MEANS I SEE YOU I SEE YOU
NODDING YOUR HEAD OVER THERE.
ANYBODY WANT KNOW IF ANY OF THE
COMMISSIONERS WANT TO.
>> I CAN I CAN I CAN YOU KNOW
EXPOUND ON THAT ALSO CULTURE
YOU KNOW, CULTURE THIS POLICY
FOR BREAKFAST, LUNCH AND
DINNER.
>> SO THAT MEANS, YOU KNOW, IT
THE CULTURE HAS TO BE IT HAS TO
BE SHAPED RIGHT THERE.
>> THERE WAS A CULTURE THAT
EXISTED HERE PRIOR TO CHIEF
ANDERSON TAKING HIS HIS AS OUR
POLICE CHIEF THAT QUITE FRANKLY
HAS EXISTED FOR DECADES.
AND I WILL SAY IT IS MY OPINION
THAT IT IS THE STATUS QUO THAT
EXISTED HERE AND OUR JOB AS
CITY COUNCIL AND THE JOB OF THE
CITY ADMINISTRATOR WAS TO BRING
IN THE POLICE CHIEF TO HELP
SHAPE THE CULTURE SO THAT THE
ORDINANCE THAT WE APPROVED AT
CITY COUNCIL WE WOULD HAVE THE
OUTCOME THAT WE WANTED AND SO
THIS IS PROBABLY A GOOD TIME TO
PASS THIS DISCUSSION ON OVER TO
LET ME LET ME STOP YOU BEFORE
BEFORE OK THAT OK I'M SURE
THANK YOU VERY THANK YOU VERY
MUCH.
YOU'RE WELCOME.
THE COUNCIL WOMAN OH I WANTED
TO I WAS INTRODUCING SOME
PEOPLE THAT WE WERE HAPPY TO
SEE AND ANOTHER ONE OF THEM IS
THE THE FAIRLY NEW PRESIDENT
OF THE ANN ARBOR BRANCH OF THE
NAACP, MR. ANDRE WATSON WHO WAS
IN THE PAC WELCOME.
HAPPY TO SEE YOU HERE.
AND YOU MAY REMEMBER THAT MR.
WATSON WAS MENTIONED IN THE
ARTICLES IN THE ANN ARBOR
NEWS THAT HE WAS STOPPED AND
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO YOU
KNOW, IF THIS DISCUSSION TAKES
US, IT'LL TAKE US AS LONG AS IT
TAKES US WE CAN FINISH OUR
BUSINESS AT THE END OF THE
MEETING AND YOU WON'T HAVE TO
SIT THROUGH THAT.
WHAT THE ANN ARBOR
NEWS HEADLINE SAID IS BLACK
DRIVERS STILL
DISPROPORTIONATELY STOPPED BY
POLICE DESPITE THE ORDINANCE.
SO CHIEF ANDERSON, WE ARE SO
HAPPY TO HAVE YOU HERE AND I
INVITE YOU TO COME IN AND SPEAK
WITH US ABOUT I KNOW YOU AND I
HAVE SPOKEN AND I KNOW YOU HAVE
SOME INTERESTING INFORMATION
FOR US.
I DO.
THANK YOU, MADAM.
CHAIR.
AND I WANT TO THANK YOU ALL FOR
ALLOWING ME TO BE HERE.
MEMBER HARRISON, YOU KNOW,
THANKS FOR HAVING THE COURAGE
TO LEAD THE AGENDA WITH RESPECT
TO HOW OUR ANN ARBOR POLICE
DEPARTMENT IS CARRYING OUT OUR
MISSION BEFORE I START, THERE'S
A COUPLE OF THINGS I WANT TO
SAY REAL QUICKLY BECAUSE WE HAD
AN OPPORTUNITY TO INTRODUCE
SOME FOLKS SO I GOT TO
INTRODUCE SOME FOLKS TO OK SO I
HAVE A ACTING COMMANDER DUNLAP
IS HERE AND ALSO IS ACTING
COMMANDER NOVELS.
DORF IS HERE IN THIS AND
SERGEANT KEENE SERGEANT
ANTHONY PETTILY WE SWAC HERE
TODAY.
SO THANK YOU SO MUCH.
I AM REALLY GLAD TO BE HERE FOR
THE FIRST TIME.
I GENERALLY DON'T SPEAK TOO
MUCH ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS
THAT ARE IMPORTANT TO ME WITH
RESPECT TO HOW I VIEWED THINGS
SO I WILL JUST SAY
EDUCATIONALLY I HAVE A MASTER'S
DEGREE IN EDUCATION AND
LEADERSHIP AND I HARDLY EVER
TALK ABOUT THAT BUT REALLY IN
REALITY I AM A TEACHER AND SO I
THINK MY EMPLOYEES KNOW THAT
OFTEN I'M TEACHING AND
EXPLAINING THINGS AND WHAT IS
IMPORTANT IS BECAUSE I JUST
WANT TO BRING YOU AN
INTERESTING FACT WHEN WE TALK
ABOUT TRAFFIC STOPS WE KNOW THE
TRAFFIC STOPS HAVE HAD A
HYSTERICAL AND DETRIMENTAL
IMPACT PEOPLE IN COLOR AND WE
KNOW THAT AND I'M NOT
MINIMIZING THAT.
BUT THE FIRST HISTORICAL
TRAFFIC STOP THAT WE KNOW
OF HAPPEN TO PRESIDENT ULYSSES
S. GRANT AND HE WAS A SITTING
PRESIDENT IN 1872 AND HE WAS
WARNED BY A BLACK POLICE
OFFICER TO STOP SPEEDING WHILE
HE WAS THE PRESIDENT.
HE WAS SPEEDING IN A HORSE
CARRIAGE AND HE DID NOT STOP SO
THAT POLICE OFFICER ARRESTED
HIM WHILE HE WAS RIDING THAT
HORSE CARRIAGE FOR SPEEDING AND
THAT'S WHERE THE FIRST REALLY
HISTORICAL TRAFFIC STOPS
OCCURRED.
BUT TRAFFIC STOPS ARE TAKEN ON
A MEANING FAR GREATER THAN THAT
STOP WE BELIEVE AS COUNCIL
MEMBERS STARTED THIS ORDINANCE
IS THAT SHE DIDN'T WANT TO
ELIMINATE THE FACT THAT TRAFFIC
STOPS WERE THERE IN ORDER TO
ADDRESS SAFETY PRIMARY CONCERNS
WHICH SOMEWHAT CONFUSING TO
SOME PEOPLE BECAUSE IT WAS
ALWAYS HER INTENT TO ADDRESS
THE SAFETY BUT NOT THE HARM
ASSOCIATED WITH WHAT
TRANSPIRED.
I WOULD LIKE FOR US TO BE
CONVERSATION, YOU KNOW, SO I
WANT TO SAY A FEW THINGS BUT I
KNOW THERE ARE SOME INDIVIDUALS
THAT WOULD LIKE TO TALK TO US
BUT I WANT TO GIVE YOU SOME
STATS.
WHEN WE STARTED LOOKING AT THE
STOPS THAT WE HAD WITH VERY
SPECIFIC WE GO BACK TO JANUARY
TWENTY TWENTY TWO AND AT THAT
TIME FOR ALL RACES WE HAD STOPS
FOR ABOUT ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
FIVE INDIVIDUALS AND THEN
WITHOUT GOING THROUGH ALL
OF THE STOPS THAT YEAR THAT WAS
THE HIGHEST NUMBER OF STOPS WE
MADE IN DECEMBER WE ENDED UP
WITH 129 STOPS AND THEN IN
JANUARY OF TWENTY TWENTY THREE
FOR ALL EQUIPMENT STOPS I'M
SORRY EQUIPMENT STOPS ALL RACES
WE WERE UP TO ONE HUNDRED AND
SIXTY FOUR STOPS AND THEN AT
THE END OF THE YEAR WE WERE
DOWN TO ABOUT ONE HUNDRED AND
NINETEEN AND THEN IN JANUARY
TWENTY FOUR THINGS STARTED
CRYING.
I GOT HERE TWENTY FOUR SHORTLY
AFTER THAT WE WERE AROUND SIXTY
THREE STOPS AND THEN WE ENDED
UP WITH SIXTY FOUR STOPS AT THE
END OF THE YEAR AND THEN THEY
STARTED TO INCREASE A LITTLE
BIT SLIGHTLY IN JANUARY TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE AND NOW TO EIGHT WE
ARE IN SEPTEMBER AS IT STANDS
WE HAVE ZERO TRAFFIC STOPS FOR
EQUIPMENT VIOLATIONS ZERO.
SO I WANT TO SPEAK TO THAT
SPECIFICALLY IN TERMS OF JUST
REAL QUICKLY ABOUT CULTURE
CHANGE.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I
LEARNED HISTORICALLY WITH
POLICE OFFICERS AND PEOPLE IN
GENERAL IS DID YOU HAVE A REAL
CONVERSATION ABOUT DO WE HAVE
BIASES
?
AND YES, I DID I WOULD MEET
SOME EMPLOYEES AND PEOPLE THAT
FELT LIKE THEY DID NOT HAVE
BIASES.
THAT IS THE ODD STATEMENT I
WOULD LIKE TO SEE THAT PROVEN.
I NEVER MET SOMEONE THAT
DOESN'T HAVE SOME TYPE OF BIAS
AND THE POLICE OFFICERS SPEND A
LOT OF THEIR TIME WITH RESPECT
TO LOOKING AT CRIME AND NOT
REALLY THINKING ABOUT THE
DETRIMENTAL IMPACT THAT IT HAS
ON PEOPLE AND IT REQUIRES
LEADERS TO GET IN FRONT
OF THOSE TYPES OF CONCERNS LIKE
COUNCIL MEMBER HARRISON AND THE
REST OF THE COUNCIL TO BRING
THAT TO OUR ATTENTION THAT ALSO
ALLOW FOR US TO EMERGE.
WE HAVE OUR DOG PARK WHO IS
HERE TODAY THE VOICE OF THE
COMMUNITY TO SPEAK TRUTH TO
POWER AND TO TELL THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT AND OTHERS WHEN THEY
BELIEVE THAT WE ARE ACTING
OUTSIDE OF THE THINGS THEY
EXPECT FOR THE COMMUNITY.
ALL OF THAT IS THE TRUE
GOVERNANCE OF POLICING THE
COMMUNITY NEEDS YOU AND THAT
YOU DOING A GREAT JOB THE
POLICE OFFICERS AND TALKING TO
BIAS'S WE STARTED VERY EARLY ON
IN JANUARY THIS YEAR AND WE
WERE JUST TALK ABOUT STOPS
OF PEOPLE OF COLOR AND
INITIALLY IT WAS IN THAT TIME
AROUND 60 ALL THE STOPS AND IN
FEBRUARY WHEN WE STARTED THESE
CONVERSATIONS THEY WENT UP TO
ABOUT NINETY FOUR STOPS.
SO WHEN I FIRST STARTED TALKING
TO INDIVIDUALS ABOUT IT IT WAS
REALLY CHALLENGING TO GET
INDIVIDUALS TO REALLY
UNDERSTAND WHAT WE WERE GOING
AND IN THE FOLLOWING MONTH THEY
WENT UP TO ONE FOR SORT
OF CONVERSATION STARTED AND WE
LOOKED AT THE ORDINANCE AND
THINGS DIDN'T GET BETTER.
THEY INCREASED AND SO WHAT I'VE
LEARNED IN POLICING I'VE BEEN
IN LAW ENFORCEMENT FOR THIRTY
NINE YEARS AND THE ONE THING
THAT I DO RESPECT THE POLICE
OFFICERS AND MANY OF THEM
INDICATED THAT THEY DIDN'T
TRULY UNDERSTAND TILL WE
BROUGHT THE NUMBERS TO THEM AND
I DON'T KNOW HOW PEOPLE CHANGE
WITH RESPECT TO JUST MAKING
THEM AWARE OF WHAT THE ISSUES
ARE.
BUT I MADE IT VERY CLEAR TO MY
STAFF THAT WHETHER YOU CHANGE
OR NOT, I'M YOUR EMPLOYER AND
AS YOUR EMPLOYER YOU CAN THINK
OR DO WHATEVER YOU WANT WHEN
YOU'RE NOT AT WORK BUT WHEN YOU
COME TO WORK I'M GOING TO
CREATE POLICIES THAT HOLD YOU
ACCOUNTABLE AND THAT'S WHAT I
DID.
AND SO WE CREATED POLICIES AND
WE TALK TO OUR COMMAND
LEADERSHIP AND OUR COMMAND
LEADERSHIP GOT ON BOARD WITH
THE CHANGES WE WERE MAKING AND
MANY OF THEM WERE HERE TODAY
AND A 100 PERCENT SUPPORTED THE
DIRECTION THAT WE WERE GOING AS
WE SPOKE SPECIFICALLY ABOUT THE
COUNCIL'S ORDINANCE BIG BOX
ORDINANCE OR EIGHT BOX RESPONSE
AS WELL AS COUNCIL MEMBER
HARRISON.
AND AFTER NUMEROUS
CONVERSATIONS WITH OUR STAFF WE
ALL AGREED THAT WE DIDN'T WANT
TO BE AN AGENCY THAT WAS SEEN
AS ONE THAT WAS HAVING A
DISPARATE IMPACT ON PEOPLE
OF COLOR THAT IS IN AN AGENCY
THAT WE BELIEVE IS A MODEL
POLICE DEPARTMENT AGENCY AND
THERE'S NO WAY THAT I WOULD BE
ABLE TO ACCOMPLISH THAT WITHOUT
THE MEN AND WOMEN OF THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT IN ORDER TO MOVE
THINGS FORWARD.
AND HE DID.
AND SO YOU WOULD SEE AS I
FINISH TALKING HERE IS THAT
PROBABLY BY APRIL WE WERE DOWN
TO ABOUT TWENTY STOPS AND THEN
WE ISSUED IN A POLICY WE
USHERED THE POLICY RIGHT IN
MARCH I'M SORRY WHEN WE WERE AT
THE PEAK WE'RE AT 104 STOPS AND
THEN ISSUED IN THE POLICY ONCE
WE PUT THE POLICY DOWN THE NEXT
MONTH THEY DROP TO TWENTY EIGHT
THE FOLLOWING MONTH IT MAY IT
DROP THE FOUR STOPS
OF AFRICAN-AMERICANS AND THEN
IN JUNE IT WENT BACK UP A SPIKE
TO SIX AND I'LL KEEP IN MIND WE
WERE IN THE HUNDREDS AND THEN
JULY WENT TO ONE AND IN AUGUST
IT WENT TO ZERO AND IN
SEPTEMBER WE WENT TO ZERO AND
BECAUSE OF WHAT YOU'VE DONE I
DON'T THINK THAT THERE'S ANY
POLICE DEPARTMENT IN THE
COUNTRY THAT ARE MEETING THESE
THESE AGENDAS.
NO ONE IS WE'RE THE FIRST IN
I'M ALWAYS I'M SOMEWHAT
SUPERSTITIOUS SO A LITTLE BIT
CAREFUL SOMETIMES WHEN I TALK
ABOUT TRAFFIC STOPS AND
EQUIPMENT VIOLATIONS BECAUSE
OF STUDIES WILL TELL US PEOPLE
WILL SAY IF YOU STOP IF YOU
DECREASE TRAFFIC STOPS IT'LL
HAVE AN IMPACT ON TRAFFIC
FATALITIES AND WE WERE HAVING A
LOT OF TRAFFIC FATALITIES UNTIL
WE IMPLEMENTED THE EQUIPMENT
VIOLATIONS AND STOPPED DOING
THEM AND AT THAT TIME THEY
STOPPED.
WE HAD ONLY ONE FATALITY
INCIDENT AND THAT WAS BECAUSE
UNFORTUNATELY A PERSON RAN INTO
A DEER.
AND SO WHAT THE STUDY SHOWED IS
THAT WHEN YOU'RE STOPPING
PEOPLE LESS FOR MINOR EQUIPMENT
VIOLATIONS, YOUR COMMUNITY IS
SAFER AND SOUNDS KIND OF ODD
BUT THAT'S WHAT THE STUDIES
SAY.
THAT'S WHAT THE INFORMATION
THAT WAS BROUGHT TO ME SUGGEST.
WE LOOKED AT IT AND THAT'S
CLEARLY WHAT'S HAPPENING.
BUT I'LL END BY SAYING THAT IS
REALLY NOT ABOUT DATA.
THIS IS ABOUT MAKING SURE THAT
WE DON'T HAVE A DISPARATE
IMPACT ON PEOPLE WHEN WE STOP
THEM.
MAINLY PEOPLE OF COLOR MOSTLY
IN EVEN I AM TRIGGERED WHEN I
GO TO OTHER PLACES AND I'M
DRIVING MY VEHICLE AND I SEE A
POLICE OFFICER BEHIND ME IT
MAKES ME NERVOUS AND I DON'T
LIKE IT AND I HAVE REASONS FOR
THAT.
AND SO I RECOGNIZE THE FACT
THAT THERE ARE TRUE CONCERNS
AND BRINGING THAT TO THE
ATTENTION OF OUR POLICE
OFFICERS AND THEN MOVING
FORWARD HAS BEEN A GREAT THING
AND WE HOPE TO CONTINUE TO MOVE
FORWARD BUT WE'RE NOT PERFECT
SO I WILL SAY THIS WE'RE NOT
PERFECT.
THE ONLY TIME WE THINK ABOUT
PERFECTION NO THAT IS IN
PERFECT IS NOT AUTHENTIC, IS
NOT AUTHENTIC TO TRY TO BE
PERFECT.
AND AS I SAID TO OUR PEOPLE, WE
CAN DO THIS WE CAN MAKE THIS
CHANGE AND GET IT DOWN TO ZERO
.
AND I TALKED TO THEM TODAY AND
I ASKED THEM DO YOU KNOW WHAT
HENRY FORD SAID WHEN HE TALKED
ABOUT WHAT YOU CAN HIS
STATEMENTS ARE WHETHER YOU
THINK YOU CAN OR YOU THINK YOU
CAN'T IS TRUE.
SO IF YOU THINK YOU CAN'T, IT'S
TRUE.
IF YOU THINK YOU CAN IS TRUE.
AND THAT'S BEEN THE MODEL THAT
I PUT IN TO OUR EMPLOYEES ALL
THE TIME IS ALWAYS YOU CAN DO
THE SAME MODEL I HAVE FOR MY
GRANDKIDS.
SO THAT BEING I SAID OPEN IT UP
FOR DISCUSSION OR ANY
CONVERSATION.
>> SO BEFORE YOU YOU DO THAT,
CHIEF ANDERSON, LET ME JUST YOU
HAVE HANDED US SOME INFORMATION
TO THE COMMISSION AND HOPEFULLY
WE CAN HAVE IT AVAILABLE FOR
CITIZENS IF THEY WANT TO SEE
THIS.
>> BUT IT LOOKS TO ME LIKE
THERE'S A REAL POSSIBILITY THAT
THE INFORMATION IN THE ANN
ARBOR NEWS ARTICLE WAS PROBABLY
TAKEN OFF OF THE POLICE
DASHBOARD ON ONLINE RIGHT.
AND DID NOT INCLUDE STATISTICS
AFTER YOUR POLICY WAS PUT IN
PLACE.
>> IS THAT YOUR UNDERSTANDING
IS SOME OF THE INFORMATION WAS
PUT IN PLACE AFTER AFTER THE
POLICY INITIALLY BUT THEY
STARTED TO ADD THE INFORMATION
TO ME.
WHAT IT SHOWED IS THAT IT WAS A
NEGATIVE IMPACT PEOPLE OF COLOR
THAT WILL STOP.
THAT'S WHAT THE ARTICLE SHOWED
.
THAT IS AN ACCURATE ARTICLE
REFLEXION.
SO WHAT THEY PROVIDED WAS TRUE
BUT WHAT WE WERE ABLE TO GET TO
SEE IS WHAT TOOK PLACE AFTER
THE DEPARTMENT AND WE
IMPLEMENTED THE POLICIES WHICH
I PROVIDED YOU COPIED A POLICY
AND THEN WE STARTED TO SEE THEY
STARTED TO SEE THAT WE WERE
MAKING SIGNIFICANT CHANGES AND
I DID A NUMBER OF INTERVIEWS I
THINK ABOUT FIVE DIFFERENT
INTERVIEWS WITH COUNCIL MEMBERS
AND SHE KIND OF EXPLAINED THAT
THAT WAS HER ROLE AS A COUNCIL
MEMBER TO COMMUNICATE AND SHE
JUST PROVIDED THE FACTS AND IN
FACT STARTED TO LAY OUT THAT WE
DID MAKE A LOT OF CHANGES AND
SO BASED ON THIS GRAPH THAT
YOU'VE SHOWN US IN TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE THIS EQUIPMENT
STOPS WENT FROM ONE HUNDRED AND
FOUR BACK IN FEBRUARY OR MARCH
DOWN TO ONE IN OH JULY AND ZERO
IN AUGUST THAT IS CORRECT
BECAUSE IF THE POLICY WAS
IMPLEMENTED IMPLEMENTED ON MAY
28TH SO IF YOU LOOK AT MARCH WE
WERE ALL THE WAY UP TO ONE
HUNDRED AND FOUR STOPS SO AT
THE END OF THE MONTH SO WE
ENDED WE CREATED A POLICY AT
THE END OF THE MONTH AND THEN
RIGHT AFTER WE CREATED THE
POLICY THINGS JUST DROPPED DOWN
COMPLETELY GOOD.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU SO VERY MUCH FOR
COMING IN HELPING US UNDERSTAND
WHAT'S WHAT'S GOING ON.
SO FOR EVERYONE WHO'S HERE
AGAIN WE CAN GET MORE COPIES.
SO AFTER WE'RE DONE SOMEONE CAN
HAVE A COPY OF WHAT WE'RE
LOOKING AT.
THERE ARE COPIES OF THE OF THE
DRIVER DRIVING AND QUALITY
ORDINANCE ON THE TABLE IN THE
FRONT AND IF ARE ANY IF THERE'S
ANYONE WHO'D LIKE TO PICK ONE
UP IF YOU LEAVE THE BEFORE THE
END OF THE MEETING YOU FEEL
FEEL FREE TO DO SO.
I THINK THERE'S ALSO COPIES
OF OUR WE HAVE GOOD WE HAVE
COPIES HERE COPIES OF OUR
ANNUAL REPORT FROM YAKUPOV SO
I'M GOING TO OPEN IT UP.
WE USUALLY HAVE PUBLIC COMMENT
.
YOU CAN ASK QUESTIONS IF IT'S A
COMMENT WE ARE LIMITED TO THREE
MINUTES IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS,
FEEL FREE TO DIRECT IT TO
WHAT'S UP?
WHAT?
OH YEAH.
>> IF HE WISHES TO SPEAK I
DON'T I DON'T WANT TO PUT
ANYBODY
ON THE SPOT YOU WANT TO
HAVE WITH ME MR WATSON.
THANK YOU SIR.
COME RIGHT ON UP OK.
GOOD EVENING EVERYBODY.
GOOD EVENING.
>> SO THE IRONY IS I SPOKE ON
BEHALF OF THE AUDIENCE WHEN IT
WAS PASSING AND THEN TO HAVE
BEEN PULLED OVER RANDOMLY IT
WAS JUST VERY RICH.
I COULDN'T BELIEVE IT BUT I DO
BELIEVE THAT'S A COMMUNITY WE
HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO CREATE A
MODEL OF WHAT THE SOLUTION
LOOKS LIKE AND ACTUALLY I
APPRECIATE THE ORGANIZATION
INVITING ME OUT TONIGHT BECAUSE
WE DO HAVE TO EXAMINE IT AND
MAKE SURE THAT IT'S PROPERLY
BEING ASSESSED AND THE POLICIES
THAT WE ARE WORKING ON
IMPLEMENTING ARE ACTUALLY
EFFECTIVE.
AND I KNEW KNOW ALSO FROM A
NATIONAL LEVEL I SUSPECT THAT
THERE COULD VERY WILL BE MORE
HEAVY HANDEDNESS WHICH IS
CONCERNING AS A PERSON OF COLOR
IN THIS COUNTRY.
SO I APPLAUD OUR COMMUNITY FOR
ATTEMPTING TO DO WHAT WE'RE
DOING HERE, DOING THE WORK NOW
AT THE END OF OUR EFFORTS IT
WOULD BE GREAT TO SEE THOSE
NUMBERS SHIFT THE WAY THAT THEY
SHIFT IT.
I'M ASSUMING THOSE NUMBERS ARE
ACCURATE RIGHT?
>> MY EXPERIENCE WAS IT WAS
PRETTY BIZARRE BUT YOU KNOW, I
ACTUALLY FELT MORE FOR THOSE
WHO MAY NOT HAVE THE VOICE THAT
I HAVE HERE IN THIS COMMUNITY.
I WAS ABOUT 12 STEPS FROM MY
HOUSE SO WAS SUPER BIZARRE AND
I WAS ACCUSED OF SOMETHING LIKE
BEING CLOSE TO THE LINE OR
HUGGING THE LINE I NEVER HEARD
OF BUT THAT ALL HAPPENED.
BUT IF WE CAN MODEL WHAT
SOLUTION LOOKS LIKE FROM BEING
A VISIONARY TO LISTENING TO AN
UNDERREPRESENTED COMMUNITY
AFRICAN-AMERICANS IN THIS
COMMUNITY, I THINK THIS IS A
VERY LOW POPULATION TO HAVING A
POLICE CHIEF WHICH WAS ACTUALLY
CHAMPIONING EVEN UNPOPULAR
LITERALLY WITHIN THE POLICE
FORCE.
SO I JUST APPLAUD US FOR DOING
THE WORK OF FINDING SOLUTION
AND I JUST ALSO ENCOURAGE US TO
CONTINUE TO LOOK AT THE
NUMBERS, YOU KNOW, TO MAKE SURE
THE NUMBERS ALIGN UP.
SO WHEN POLICY IS BROUGHT IN,
COMMUNITIES ARE DOING THEIR
PART THAT WE ACTUALLY GET WHAT
WE'RE AFTER.
SO THANK THANK YOU SO VERY
MUCH.
BY THE WAY, WHEN I COME ON UP
SO WE WE HAVE A NATIONAL
ORGANIZATION FOR POLICE
OVERSIGHT AND LAST YEAR
COUNCILPERSON HARRISON WAS
APPLAUDED AT THE NATIONAL
MEETING BECAUSE OF HER
SPONSORSHIP AND PREPARATION
OF THIS DRIVE EQUALITY
AUDIENCE.
SO THIS IS THIS THIS IS
SOMETHING NEW AROUND THE
COUNTRY AND WE ARE VERY HAPPY
TO HAVE IT HERE.
>> YES, SIR.
WOULD YOU START BY GIVING YOUR
NAME PLEASE AND THEN OH YOU
HAVE A QUESTION FOR ELLEN
BERCY.
YOU MIGHT REMEMBER ME FROM LAST
YEAR.
I'M HERE TO GIVE YOU PART TWO
OF CAROLINE IS READY.
YEAH, YOU REMEMBER ROANOKE
CITY?
I WAS DRAGGED INTO COURT IN
ORDER TO POINT CONNECTS YOU AND
OUR WAY CITY.
I WAS BROUGHT INTO COURT AND
DRAWN AND QUARTERED FOR
ASSAULTING A WOMAN WHEN THAT
DIDN'T HAPPEN BECAUSE OF THE
ACCUSATION OF MENTAL ILLNESS
THE SENTENCE WAS HE SEEMED AS
IF MENTAL ILLNESS WAS INVOLVED
IN HIS DECISION MAKING.
I THINK THE MAGISTRATE SHOULD
HAVE MADE THAT SHE INSTEAD
OF HE OH DEAR NO PRONOUNS.
I ASKED MYSELF WHY WOULD THIS
DISTRICT DO THAT TO ME AFTER
2007 WHEN VIRGINIA PASSED
MENTAL HEALTH REFORMS TO A
CERTAIN EFFECT?
WHY WOULD IT ABUSE THOSE
REFORMS TO GET CONVICTIONS ON
ME IN COURT AND FILL QUOTAS FOR
A CERTAIN BLUE RIDGE BEHAVIORAL
HEALTH CARE BECAUSE THEY WERE
CONSTANTLY TRYING TO GET ME TO
SIGN FORMS FOR MENTAL HEALTH
TREATMENT WHEN I DIDN'T ASSAULT
ANYONE?
AND WHY WOULD YOU WANT ME TO
AFFIRM MENTAL ILLNESS WHEN OH
IS THAT THAT WHY YOU WANT ME TO
PUT MENTAL ILLNESS?
COULD YOU BE PROOF OF THAT?
YEAH, BECAUSE I DON'T KNOW WHY
YOU WOULD ABUSE THESE LAWS IN
THE SAME DISTRICT AS VIRGINIA
TECH.
YEAH, VIRGINIA TECH YOU GET THE
CONNECTION NOW BECAUSE THAT'S
WHAT I DO.
ASK MYSELF WHY ARE YOU ABUSING
MENTAL PERFORMANCE PASSED AFTER
THE VIRGINIA TECH SHOOTING TO
PREVENT WHAT PEASHOOTERS WHY
ARE YOU USING THEM IN THIS
MANNER?
BECAUSE IT DOESN'T MEAN THEY
DON'T CARE.
>> NO, STILL DON'T CARE NOW
VIRGINIA HAS BEEN ABUSING ITS
MENTAL HEALTH REFORMS TO GET
EASY CONVICTIONS IN COURT AND
FILL QUOTAS FOR PRIVATE HEALTH
CARE PROVIDERS LIKE ROULETTE
BLUE BABILLE HEALTH CARE WHICH
IS DOWN ARONOW COUNTY AND THERE
ARE OTHERS IN VIRGINIA.
YEAH.
AND ALSO TO COVER UP GROSS
MEDICAL ERRORS IN ITS SYSTEM.
>> YEAH.
MM HMM.
SO WHAT DOES THIS HAVE TO DO
WITH YOU MICHIGAN?
OH WELL THANKS TO MY ENCOUNTERS
WITH YOUR POLI'S UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN HOSPITAL AND YOUR
LOCAL CMH, I HAVE NO CHOICE BUT
TO CONCLUDE YOU DO EXACTLY THE
SAME KATSUAKI IDEA.
OH, I DON'T KNOW OFFICER
CURTIS, WHY DO I NEED TO TALK
TO A SOCIAL WORKER?
BECAUSE THE PEOPLE ARE
CONCERNED DO NOT LIKE MY
COMMENTS ABOUT CATHOLICS.
WELL, THEY ARE VERY
INQUISITIONAL CATHOLICS.
IS THAT WHY DUDE OR DIXON WAS
NAMED AFTER BLOODY MARY TUDOR?
OH WHAT YOU DON'T LIKE ME
INSULTING THE POPE?
WELL, FORMER PRESIDENT OF U
OF AN ANGLICAN CHRISTIAN SANTA
TO OWN WAS A MEMBER OF THE
ANGLICAN CHURCH FOUNDED BY KING
HAIDARY KING AND HENRY THE
EIGHTH.
SO WHAT HE DIDN'T LIKE BOBINO?
NO, THAT'S JUST A SAMPLE OF YOU
GUYS I'VE HAD HERE SO TELL ME
HOW AM I A MENTAL PATIENT FOR
TALKING TO TALKING TO PICNIC
TABLES?
IT'S BECAUSE THEY'RE MADE OUT
OF TALKING TO YOU.
THE TREES, THE POINT IS YOU'RE
A POLICE ADVISORY COMMITTEE IS
BIG.
I IT IS VAGUE BECAUSE YOU LET
LOCAL POLICE ABUSE THE CMH WITH
THE LOCAL HOSPITAL TO COVER UP
ANY CRITICISMS OF THEIR PERSON
BECAUSE THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT
THEY DID TO ME AND THAT'S WHY
THEY SENT ME TO MCCOLLAM COUNTY
.
THANKS FOR HOLDING ME IN
CONTEMPT DEMOCRATS NOW I KNOW
I'M GOING TO GET ELECTED IN BY
THANK YOU COST.
>> IS THERE ANYONE ELSE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK ASK
QUESTIONS OF THE CHIEF OR
COUNCILPERSON HARRISON?
I KNOW THERE IS THERE WAS A LOT
OF INTEREST AND I APPRECIATE
YOU ALL COMING OUT.
WE CERTAINLY HOPE THAT SOME
OF YOUR QUESTIONS HAVE BEEN
ADDRESSED THIS EVENING.
YES.
COME RIGHT ON OUT PLEASE.
YOU TELL YOUR NAME IF YOU'D
LIKE AND YEAH, ANYWHERE FROM
YOU DON'T HAVE TO YEAH I THANK
YOU FOR HAVING ME SPEAK
TONIGHT.
MY NAME IS JESSICA KELLY MY SON
BRANDON I THINK KELLY WAS
PICKED BY THE ANN ARBOR POLICE
JULY 1ST AND PLACED IN
WASHTENAW COUNTY JAIL MY SON
PRIOR TO BEING PICKED UP WAS
HOMELESS AND FAITH AND BATTLING
MENTAL ILLNESS.
I HAVE BEEN ADVOCATING FOR MY
SON FOR SEVERAL MONTHS UNTIL
THERE WAS AN INCIDENT WITH HIM.
SO WHY SHOULD OUR COUNTY JAIL
TO WHERE HE WAS ABLE TO START
RECEIVING TREATMENT?
I'M VERY CONCERNED BECAUSE BACK
IN TWENTY THREE HE WAS PICKED
UP AND HE WAS NOT PLACED IN
JAIL AND IT'S JUST CONCERNING
AT THE MEET AT THE MOTHER AS A
BLACK MOTHER WITH MY ONLY BLACK
BEING PICKED BY THE POLICE AND
BECAUSE OF HIS BATTLE WITH
MENTAL ILLNESS HE DID NOT CALL
ME.
I ACTUALLY CALLED BECAUSE I
DIDN'T HEAR FROM HIM.
I CALLED THE JAIL AND HE WAS
THERE FOR THE SINCE JULY I HAVE
NOT SPOKEN WITH MY SON AND I
THINK THAT'S ALL DUE TO HIS
MENTAL ILLNESS.
I JUST SEE HIM THROUGH IN
COURT.
I DON'T I HAVE NO INTERACTION
WITH MY SON.
I'M GUESSING THAT HIS MENTAL IS
BEING TAKEN CARE OF BUT IT'S
VERY HEARTBREAKING FOR ME AS A
MOTHER NOT TO HAVE THAT
COMMUNICATION WHICH I HAD WHILE
HE WAS HOMELESS.
BUT I JUST WANTED TO BRING THAT
TO YOUR AWARENESS BECAUSE I
SPOKE WITH CAROL GALLAGHER
OF NAMI.
SHE SAID THAT THE POLICE HAD
UNDERWENT EIGHT WEEK COURSE
DURING THAT TIME OVERLAP THE
TIME THAT HE WAS PICKED UP
DEALING WITH THOSE WHO ARE
HOMELESS BATTLING MENTAL
ILLNESS AND SOMETIMES WE CAN'T
RECOGNIZE I CAN LOOK AT YOU AND
I CAN'T SAY THAT YOU HAVE IT
BUT BECAUSE YOU KNOW THE FACT
THAT THAT WAS A KNOWN CONDITION
OF HIS AND HIM BEING HOMELESS,
I JUST WANTED TO BRING THAT TO
THE ATTENTION OF YOU GUYS.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
AND YOU KNOW, YOU BRING UP AN
ISSUE THAT WE WE ALSO TALK
ABOUT WE HAVE A TRAINING
COMMITTEE ON THE COMMISSION AND
I KNOW THAT COUNCIL HAS BEEN
LOOKING AT ISSUES HOW TO HANDLE
SITUATIONS THAT ARE POLICE
SITUATIONS DEALING WITH MENTAL
ILLNESS AND I IT'S A IT'S A
PROBLEM.
IT'S A REAL ISSUE AND I DON'T I
THINK THERE'S SOME TRAINING IS
CHIEF YOU ALL HAVE ANY SPECIFIC
TRAINING OF HOW TO HANDLE THOSE
KIND OF ISSUES
?
YES.
THERE'S ALSO THE THE DEPARTMENT
HAS A NUMBER OF REQUIRED
TRAININGS THROUGHOUT COLES AS
WELL AS WHICH IS OUR LICENSING
AS WELL AS INTERNAL TRAINING WE
BRING IN SPEAKERS REGULARLY FOR
TRAINING AND OUR ANNUAL
REFRESHER TRAINING AS WELL AS
THROUGHOUT THE YEAR TO DISCUSS
DIFFERENT THINGS.
WE HAVE IMPLEMENTED NEW
PROCEDURES AND POLICIES AND
STUFF LIKE THAT TO ADDRESS
THOSE THINGS AS THEY'VE COME UP
AND WE HAVE ADDITIONAL TRAINING
OFFICERS RESOURCES BEING PUT
TOWARDS THAT PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.
OFFICER CASEY WHITFORD IS
WORKING ON STUFF LIKE THAT
OF THAT NATURE WITH OUR CRISIS
RESPONSE AND DESOLATION OF THAT
AND SO ON AND SO FORTH.
IT'S ALL PART OF OUR ONGOING
TRAINING WHETHER IT'S
JUST
REGULAR CALLS FOR SERVICE TO
EXTREME SITUATIONS WHERE
INDIVIDUALS ARE IN CRISIS,
SERIOUS CRISIS AND WHAT WE CAN
DO AND WHAT RESOURCES WE CAN
PROVIDE TO THEM THEY HELP
RESOLVE THIS SITUATION AS
PEACEFULLY AS POSSIBLE.
>> THANK YOU.
APPRECIATE THAT, BRANDY.
IT IS WE ACTUALLY LOOK FOR
TRAINING AND TRAINING ACTING
COMMANDER NOVELS IS OVER
TRAINING.
WE ACTUALLY LOOK FOR TRAINING
FOR OUR MENTAL HEALTH AND WE
REQUIRED TO HAVE THAT TRAINING
AS HE INDICATED.
SO EVERY POLICE OFFICER HAS
MENTAL HEALTH TRAINING BUT WE
ALSO CREATED ADDITIONAL
TRAINING TO ADDRESS INDIVIDUALS
IN EMOTIONAL DISTRESS AND THAT
IS NEW TRAINING THAT WE
RECEIVED.
AND SO WHEN HE TALKED ABOUT
CRISIS INTERVENTION TRAINING,
WE HAVE EIGHT POLICE OFFICERS
THAT DO FORTY HOURS OF TRAINING
ON JUST HOW TO DEAL WITH PEOPLE
WE ENCOUNTER THAT ARE IN CRISIS
AND THAT'S NOT ENOUGH.
WE'RE GOING TO BE DOING MORE
TRAINING IN ADDITION TO THAT,
AS YOU'VE PROBABLY SEEN ACROSS
THE COUNTRY THAT THE POLICE
HAVE ENCOUNTERED PEOPLE WHERE
AN INDIVIDUAL THAT HAS BEEN IN
SOME TYPE OF MENTAL PSYCHOSIS
AND IN THEIR ACUITY WOULD CROSS
A POLICE OFFICER TO OVERREACT.
AND SO WE HAVE HIS ACTUAL
TRAINING WHERE WE TEACH OUR
POLICE OFFICERS WHAT REAL LIFE
SCENARIOS KIND OF AND SCENARIOS
LIKE ALMOST LIKE A VIDEO WHERE
THEY USE SPECIAL GOGGLES AND
GLASSES IN ORDER TO SEE
INDIVIDUALS THAT YOU MAY BE
ENCOUNTERING THAT MAY BE HAVING
SOME TYPE OF SUICIDAL IDEATION
OR MENTAL EPISODE AND THEN WE
EVALUATE HOW THE POLICE OFFICER
IS RESPONDING TO THAT PERSON
AND ACTUALLY DEESCALATING THE
OTHER THING IS WE BROUGHT TO
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT WAS
CALLED A PATROL MODEL AND IT IS
A MODEL THAT CAUSES THE POLICE
OFFICERS TO ASHLEY IS AN
ACRONYM BUT IT REQUIRES A
POLICE OFFICERS WHEN THEY SEE
SOMEONE THAT'S HAVING A
CONCERN, THE FIRST THING THEY
NEED TO DO IS INSTEAD
OF REACTING THEY NEED TO HAVE A
PLAN.
SO IF THEY HEAR THAT SOMEONE IS
IS SOMETHING IS GOING ON,
THEY'RE GOING TO SAY OK, WHAT
KIND OF ISSUE IS THIS PERSON
HAVING?
SO WE NEED TO PLAN AND THAT'S
REALLY IMPORTANT BECAUSE THE
FIRST PART OF THAT PLAN MAY BE
NO POLICE AND MAYBE WE DON'T
NEED TO RESPOND OR WE MAY NEED
TO HAVE SOMEONE ELSE RESPOND
AND THEN WE MOVED THROUGH OUR
TRAINING THAT WAY AND THE LAST
COMPONENT I WOULD SAY IS EVERY
YEAR WE HAVE ANNUAL REFRESHER
TRAINING AND I BELIEVE THIS
YEAR WE HAD NAMI COME INTO THE
TRAINING SO WE HAD OUR MENTAL
HEALTH PROFESSIONALS COME IN
TRAINING EVERY SINGLE POLICE
OFFICER ON HOW TO DEAL WITH
MENTAL MENTAL HEALTH AND AND
IT'S STILL NOT ENOUGH.
>> NO, THANK YOU, CHIEF.
YOU KNOW, JUST SO THAT YOU ALL
KNOW, I COMMISSIONED SOME
SEVERAL VA COMMISSIONERS TOOK
PART IN ONE OF THOSE TRAINING
EXERCISES WHERE WE HAD ON THE
GOGGLES AND THEY IT'S A
SITUATION WHERE YOU HAVE TO
RESPOND QUITE INTERESTING.
WE WERE SHOOTING PEOPLE WELL,
TOM, WE ALSO HAD AN IDEA THAT
PERHAPS THE COMMUNITY WOULD BE
INTERESTED IN SOME KIND
OF COMMUNITY TRAINING OR TO SEE
WHAT KIND OF TRAINING OUR
POLICE OFFICERS GO THROUGH AND
I WOULD ENCOURAGE ANYONE IN THE
COMMUNITY IF THAT'S SOMETHING
THAT YOU WOULD WANT TO SEE TO
CONTACT OUR OFFICE AND LET US
KNOW WHAT WHAT YOU WANT TO SEE.
THIS IS A COMMUNITY POLICE
OVERSIGHT AND WE WANT TO
REPRESENT THE COMMUNITY IN WHAT
THIS COMMISSION DOES.
>> ARE THERE ANY OTHER COMMENTS
OR QUESTIONS OR STATEMENTS AT
THIS TIME
?
I'M SORRY I JUST I JUST WANTED
TO MAKE SURE WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT THOSE GOGGLES OUR
COMMISSIONER TALK ABOUT THE
SHOOTING, THE GOGGLES SET UP
FOR THE POLICE OFFICERS TO HAVE
SHOOT NONISSUES SITUATES AND SO
THEY SHOW US WHERE WE WERE.
WE SHOULDN'T SHOOT.
BUT THE REALITY IS IS LIKE WE
REALLY TRAINED ON WHEN WE
SHOULD NOT WHO WE KNOW SHOULD
NOT SHOOT.
SO GENERALLY IF SOMEONE DOES
SOMETHING WRONG, WE'RE GOING TO
RETRAIN THEM.
YOU KNOW, OUR PART OF THAT WAS
THE COMMISSION TO KIND SEE HOW
SPLIT SECOND DECISIONS HAPPEN.
SO THEY CAN SEE WHAT HAPPENS
AND WHEN YOU UNTRAINED IT COULD
CAUSE YOU TO RESPOND, YOU KNOW,
MAYBE IN A SHOOTING.
AND I THINK THAT'S WHAT OUR
COMMISSIONER WAS SAYING
PRIMARILY RESPECTFULLY IF
YOU'RE NOT TRAINED YOU'RE GOING
TO RESPOND TO IT FASTER THAN WE
WOULD BUT IS REALLY YOU'RE
GOING TO SEE LIKE WE ONLY HAVE
LESS THAN TWO SECONDS ONE
THOUSAND ONE ONE THOUSAND TWO
THAT'S IT.
LESS THAN TWO SECONDS GENERALLY
TO RESPOND TO A SITUATION AND
WE HAVE TO MAKE A DECISION
FAST.
AND SO IF YOU'RE UNTRAINED YOU
MIGHT YOU MAY NOT BE ABLE TO
RESPOND AS FAST AS WE ARE AND
AS KIND OF I WASN'T EXACTLY
WHAT WHAT WE WHAT WE WERE
LEARNING IN THAT TRAINING.
THANK YOU, CHIEF ANDERSON.
IF THERE ARE NO OTHER QUESTIONS
ARCOM WE'RE GOING TO PROCEED
WITH THE BALANCE OF THE
COMMISSION MEETING IF ANYONE
WISHES TO NOT STAY FOR THAT,
THAT'S FINE.
YOU ARE WELCOME TO TO GO AT
THIS TIME AND AGAIN WE HAVE
MATERIALS IF YOU WANT TO PICK
THOSE UP ON THE FRONT TABLE.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
COMING.
WE APPRECIATE YOUR INTEREST
.
THOSE CARDS YOU CAN TAKE YOU
SEVERAL SO YOU CAN HAND THEM
OUT.
YEAH, GET THEM IN BOTH HANDS
AND
OK.
SO NEXT ON OUR AGENDA IS A
REPORT FROM THE CHAIR.
I DO NOT HAVE A LONG REPORT AT
ALL.
WE AS YOU KNOW WE HAD A VACANCY
ON THE COMMISSION WITH THE
DEPARTURE OF COMMISSIONER
BILLUPS VICE CHAIRMAN.
I INTERVIEWED A GENTLEMAN WHO
HAD APPLIED FOR THAT VACANCY
AND WE PASSED IT ON TO OUR
COUNCIL LIAISONS AND SO WE
EXPECT THAT HE WILL BE APPROVED
AND WE WERE LOOKING FORWARD TO
THAT AT THE SAME TIME I GOT AN
EMAIL FROM THE COMMISSIONER
JUST FRANCIS WHO INDICATES THAT
BECAUSE OF THE CHANGE IN HER
JOB RESPONSIBILITIES SHE HAS TO
RESIGN FROM THE COMMISSION.
SO WE HAVE AGAIN ANOTHER
VACANCY.
SO WE'RE WE'RE OPEN IF ANYONE
WANTS TO APPLY FOR THAT VACANCY
ON THE COMMISSION WE ARE
PLANNING I DON'T KNOW IF
EVERYBODY PROBABLY KNOWS CHIEF
ANDERSON WAS IN FERGUSON RIGHT
AFTER MICHAEL BROWN WAS WAS
KILLED AND HE HAS A
PRESENTATION ABOUT THAT
EXPERIENCE IN FERGUSON AND WE
ARE GOING TO BE SETTING THAT UP
AS ANOTHER JOINT PROJECT
BETWEEN THE DEPARTMENT AND ECHO
PARK RIGHT NOW TENTATIVELY IS
SCHEDULED FOR NOVEMBER 12TH.
I KNOW COMMISSIONER GREEN HAS
OFFERED A VENUE FOR THAT AND
WE'LL SEE IF WE CAN WORK OUT
THE AUDIO VISUAL DETAILS.
>> BUT TENTATIVELY THAT'S
THAT'S SCHEDULED FOR NOVEMBER
12TH.
AND WE'D LIKE I THINK IT'S
GOING TO BE VERY INTERESTING
FOR US TO TAKE A LOOK AT THEIR
FOUR OF US ARE GOING TO NACOLE
THE ANNUAL NATIONAL OVERSIGHT
MEETING AND THAT'LL BE TOWARDS
THE END OF OCTOBER AND THAT IS
MY REPORT.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY OLD BUSINESS
AT THIS TIME?
WE DO NOT HAVE ANY OLD BUSINESS
COMMISSIONERS.
>> IS THERE ANY OLD BUSINESS TO
DISCUSS AT THIS TIME?
SEEING NONE.
WE HAVE NO BUSINESS.
THANK YOU.
DO WE HAVE ANY NEW BUSINESS?
WE HAVE NO NEW BUSINESS ON THE
AGENDA AT THIS TIME.
COMMISSIONERS' IS THERE ANY NEW
BUSINESS ON THE AGENDA THAT YOU
ALL WOULD LIKE TO DISCUSS AT
THIS TIME?
>> SEEING NONE.
WE HAVE NO NEW BUSINESS THEN
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEES
POLICY COMMITTEE.
I KNOW THAT WE'RE LOOKING
FORWARD TO A REPORT THE POLICY
COMMITTEE IS TAKING A LOOK AT
THE POLICE POLICIES AND IS
GOING TO MAKE A REPORT TO US.
THERE ARE A LOT OF POLICIES
DENHA POLICIES.
THERE ARE A LOT OF WHAT ARE YOU
MAJOR?
ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY TWO.
OK, FIGARO'S AND SUBPARTS SO
OUR COMMITTEE POLICY COMMITTEE
IS LOOKING AT OUR POLICIES AND
THEY WILL BE PRESENTING A
REPORT TO US IN THE NEXT.
WELL WE WE ASKED THEM TO DO IT
IN THE FALL AND IT'S JUST FALL
STARTING PROBABLY TOMORROW.
SO WE EXPECT THAT REPORT WILL
BE COMING SHORTLY.
TRAINING COMMITTEE
NO REPORT AT
THIS TIME.
OK, DO YOU THINK?
WELL, OK WHAT NO COMPUTERS, NO
TRAINING.
>> YOU ALL DON'T WANT TO TRAIN
US ANYMORE OK?
I'M JUST NOT DONE WITH OK WE'RE
ALWAYS GOING OVER THE TRAIN OK
OK.
>> DO WE STILL THINK WE CAN GET
A COMMUNITY THING THAT PEOPLE
CAN SIGN UP FOR THE WORKSHOP.
I'M SURE IT'LL WORK OUT OK.
ALL RIGHT THANK YOU OUTREACH
COMMITTEE NO REPORT PLANNING
COMMITTEE COMPETITION.
NO NO REPORT.
ALL RIGHT LET ME READ I PART
OF MY REPORT WAS TO WELCOME
EVERYBODY BACK FROM THE SUMMER.
OF COURSE WE WERE OFF FOR JULY
AND AUGUST AND SO NOW WE'RE
BACK TO WORK FOR THE FALL
INFORMATION MANAGERS COMMITTEE
OF JUST THE REPORT ON THE
COMPLAINTS THAT WE RECEIVED.
>> ALL THE COMPLAINTS ARE
INCLUDED IN THAT REPORT THAT
YOU HAVE RECEIVED IN YOUR
PACKETS.
YEAH, WE HAVE SO FAR TWENTY
SEVEN COMPLAINTS THAT WERE
RECEIVED BY PARK AND THAT DOES
NOT INCLUDE THE ONES THAT WERE
FILED DIRECTLY WITH AP.
SO WE ARE SEPARATE OUR
COMPLAINTS AFTER AP HAD
FINISHED THEIR REVIEW
OF INVESTIGATIONS.
WE LOOKED AT THOSE ONES
REVIEWED THEM AND GENERATED
REPORTS AND IF THERE WERE
RECOMMENDATIONS THOSE WOULD BE
INCLUDED AND THOSE REPORTS THIS
IS PART OF WHAT WE'RE DOING.
THE OTHER THING IS IN THE PAST
FEW WEEKS OR MONTHS, TWO MONTHS
OF AP IS ENTERTAINING
MODERNIZING THEIR RECORD
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM AND THERE
WERE FOUR VENDORS THAT
PRESENTED THE WHAT YOU CALL IT
THE SYSTEMS TO AP.
I MANAGED TO ATTEND VISU A
COUPLE OF THOSE THE OTHER TWO I
WAS NOT ABLE BUT SERGEANT
TURLEY HAS SENT ME THE LINKS TO
ALL THE FOR AND I LOOKED AT ALL
THE FOUR AND ALL THE WRITTEN
STATEMENTS AND RANKED THEM.
I SENT AN EMAIL BACK TO AP THE
RANKING THOSE SYSTEMS ARE BASIC
THE THE RECOMMENDATIONS WOULD
BE EASE OF USE ADDRESSING ALL
THE ISSUES THAT WE WOULD LIKE
FROM THE SYSTEM IN TERMS
OF DATA ANALYSIS ARE THE
SUPPORT FOR THE SYSTEM FROM THE
VENDORS AND THE OTHER THING IS
TO INCLUDE AND THE THE SYSTEMS
THAT ARE GOING TO BE USING A
FOR ETHNICITY OR RACE FOR THE
ARAB OR NORTH AFRICAN BASED ON
THE US CENSUS I USE THE WORD
MYNOR MEANING MIDDLE EASTERN
NORTH AFRICAN AS IRACE BECAUSE
SOMETIMES WHEN YOU FIND
SOMEBODY IF LOOK AT MYSELF AND
YOU KNOW WHAT I'M GOING TO
MYSELF I LOOK A LITTLE BIT
WHITE OVER HERE SOMETIMES I SEE
A WHITE BUT REALLY IT'S NOT THE
ETHNICITY THAT I'M LOOKING AT.
SO IF WE HAVE A DISTINCT ONE AS
MIDDLE EASTERN NORTH AFRICAN
THAT WOULD ALSO GIVE US ANOTHER
SOURCE OF ANALYZING DATA AND
MORE FIFTH THE WAY THAN JUST
LUMPING ALL THE DIFFERENT
GROUPS JUST BASED ON HOW THE
SKIN COLOR LOOKS LIKE.
AND SO THIS IS SOME OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS I HAVE.
I KNOW DECISION PROBABLY WAS
NOT MADE YET TO WHICH SYSTEM IS
GOING TO ADOPT BUT DEFINITELY
WHATEVER SYSTEM AS I LOOKED AT
WOULD BE MUCH, MUCH BETTER MORE
FLEXIBLE DYNAMIC THAN THE ONE
THAT IS CURRENTLY BEING USED BY
AP.
THANK YOU.
JUST TO FOLLOW UP AIRPARK PART
OF WHAT WE DO IS REVIEW
COMPLAINTS FROM CITIZENS WITH
REGARD TO THEIR INTERACTION
WITH THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
COMPLAINTS CAN COME IN DIRECTLY
TO US.
WE HAVE AN OFFICE THEY CAN
CALL, THEY CAN EMAIL OR
COMPLAINTS CAN COME THROUGH THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND PARK DOES
NOT DO ANY REVIEW UNTIL AFTER
THE DEPARTMENT HAS HAS ALREADY
REVIEWED THE COMPLAINT.
IT'S INTERESTING YOU KNOW, WE
TALK ABOUT TRYING TO FIGURE HOW
THINGS AFFECT DIFFERENT
SEGMENTS OF SOCIETY.
YOU KNOW, IF YOU LOOK AT YOUR
DRIVER'S LICENSE, IT DOESN'T
HAVE RACE ON IT AND IT
SURPRISED ME BECAUSE I THOUGHT
IT I THOUGHT I DID BUT IT
DOESN'T.
SO SOMETIMES IN COLLECTING
THESE STATISTICS THAT WE TRY TO
USE, IT'S UP TO THE OFFICER TO
KIND FIGURE OUT, YOU KNOW, WHAT
IF WHAT IS THE RACE OF THIS
OF THIS PERSON THAT I'M
STOPPING.
SO HOPEFULLY WITH THE NEW
INFORMATION SYSTEMS IT'LL BE A
LITTLE EASIER FOR US TO COLLECT
THE DATA THAT WE'RE USING.
>> I'M SURE JUST ONE ONE MORE
COMMENT ON THE REPORT THAT WAS
PUBLISHED IN VALUES AND LIFE
WAS THE FACT THAT WE WERE NOT
AWARE OF THE DATA AND THE STOPS
BECAUSE WE DID NOT RECEIVE ANY
COMPLAINTS.
SO WE WERE LIKE BASICALLY IN
THE DARK IN TERMS OF WHAT WAS
GOING ON AND LOOKING AT THE
NUMBERS DATA MANY OF THE
ENCOUNTERS THAT
AFRICAN-AMERICAN HAD I WOULD
SAY WAS MORE OR LESS THE
POSITIVE SIDE YET WE DID NOT
GET ANY KIND OF COMPLAINT TO
FOLLOW UP AND MAKE SURE THAT
WHATEVER REASON THAT INDIVIDUAL
STOPPED WOULD BE ADDRESSED.
BUT WE DID NOT RECEIVE THAT SO
WE REALLY HAD NO IDEA AND NO
ONE HAD EVEN CONTACTED US FROM
ONLIVE OR OTHER NEWS ABOUT THE
NUMBERS.
SO WE WERE JUST LIKE ANYONE
ELSE WE WERE SURPRISED AND THAT
THE THE WAY THAT WE KNOW WHAT'S
GOING ON IS FOR THE COMMUNITY
TO TO TELL US LET US KNOW IF
YOU AND NOT ONLY IF YOU HAVE
COMPLAINTS BUT IF YOU HAVE
COMPLIMENTS.
YOU HAD A REALLY GOOD INTERAC
SESSION WITH A POLICE OFFICER.
WE'D LIKE TO KNOW THAT AS WELL
THAT THAT'S SOMETHING THAT WE
TAKE VERY SERIOUSLY NEXT ON OUR
AGENDA.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH, VICE
CHAIRMAN.
WE HAVE A COUNCIL UPDATE.
THIS IS KINDA A COUNCIL IT'S A
COUNCIL MEMBER UPDATE.
>> OKAY, SO THE UPDATE THAT I
HAVE TO SHARE WITH YOU ALL
TODAY FOR YOUR PLANNING
PURPOSES SO YOU CAN ADD THE
STATE TO YOUR CALENDAR IN
PARTNERSHIP MYSELF AND MY
INDIVIDUAL CAPACITY AS AN INNER
CITY COUNCIL MEMBER ALONG WITH
PARTNERING WITH THE ANN ARBOR
DISTRICT LIBRARY, WE'LL BE
PUTTING ON AN EVENT ABOUT THE
HIGHLY PUBLICIZED SERIAL RAPE
INVESTIGATION BY THE ANN ARBOR
POLICE DEPARTMENT THAT OCCURRED
ROUGHLY 30 YEARS AGO.
THE POLICE AND OUR POLICE
DEPARTMENT INVESTIGATED
HUNDREDS OF BLACK MALE
RESIDENTS IN ANN ARBOR AS A
RESULT FOR THIS SERIAL RAPE
INVESTIGATION AND COLLECTED
OVER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY
THREE BLOOD SAMPLES FOR DNA
ANALYSIS WHICH BASICALLY WAS A
FORM OF MASS SCREENING KNOWN AS
A DNA DRAGNET.
SO LIKE I SAID IN PARTNERSHIP
WITH THE ANN ARBOR DISTRICT
LIBRARY WE WERE PUTTING ON AN
EVENT NOVEMBER 9TH AT THE
MICHIGAN THEATER AND THAT WILL
BE FROM TWO TO FOUR.
SO FILMMAKERS TWO TO FOUR TO
BEGIN AT FOUR P.M. AND THAT'S A
SUNDAY FILMMAKER LEAH MITCHELL
WILL TELL THE STORY OF ANN
ARBOR, HIS DNA DRAGNET AND A
SHORT DOCUMENTARY AND THERE
WILL BE A PANEL DISCUSSION THAT
FOLLOWS THAT DOCUMENTARY AND SO
THAT PROJECT THAT I'M REALLY
PROUD TO HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY
TO WORK ON AND I'M REALLY VERY
THANKFUL TO THE DISTRICT
LIBRARY FOR THEIR SUPPORT IN
MAKING THIS THIS EVENT A
REALITY.
AND SO I'VE BEEN WORKING ON IT
FOR ABOUT A YEAR AND A HALF BY
THE TIME NOVEMBER GETS HERE.
SO AGAIN, I HOPE TO SEE MANY
VIEW THERE ON SUNDAY, NOVEMBER
9TH AT THE MICHIGAN THEATER.
THE EVENT STARTS AT TWO O'CLOCK
OH, AND YOU CAN READ MORE ABOUT
THE EVENT BY GOING TO ADL DOUG
FORD SLASH DNA DRAGNET.
>> THANK YOU SO
YEAH AND THAT
IS THAT WAS QUITE A INFAMOUS
EVENT FOR THOSE THAT LIVED
HERE.
YEAH.
DURING THAT TIME YEAH IT WAS IT
WAS BASICALLY THE BLACK
COMMUNITY WAS TRAUMATIZED AND
SHOCKED SO IT'S IT'S A PART
OF A DARK PART OF OUR HISTORY
THAT WE YOU KNOW, WE'D LIKE TO
FORGET ABOUT IT BUT ON THE SAME
THOUGHT WE DON'T WANT TO FORGET
ABOUT IT BECAUSE IT'S IMPORTANT
TO ACKNOWLEDGE IT.
IT'S IT'S IMPORTANT THE PURPOSE
OF THE EVENT IS FOR
TRUTHTELLING ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND
THEN REPAIR AND ALSO DISCUSSING
HOW WE MAKE SURE SOMETHING LIKE
THIS NEVER OCCURS AGAIN HERE IN
OUR CITY OR HOPEFULLY ANYWHERE
QUITE FRANKLY.
BUT AGAIN, THAT IS THIS SUNDAY,
NOVEMBER 9TH AT 2:00 AT THE
MICHIGAN THEATER.
THANK YOU.
>> WE'VE COME TO THE END OF OUR
AGENDA.
IS THERE ANYTHING THAT ANY
OF THE COMMISSIONERS WISH TO
ASK OR ADD OR COMMENT ON BEFORE
WE ADJOURN?
COMMISSIONER?
YES, OUR I'D JUST LIKE TO SAY
THAT I WAS VERY IMPRESSED WITH
THE NEW PLANNING.
A NUMBER OF THE WORKERS BY THE
DEPARTMENT.
I THINK THEY WILL MOVE IN THE
RIGHT DIRECTION.
I THINK SO TOO.
I THINK.
THANK THANK YOU FOR THAT.
>> I MEAN THE NUMBERS THE
NUMBERS TELL US A LOT AND WE'RE
GRATEFUL FOR THAT POLICY IN THE
POLICY DIRECTION OF THE
DEPARTMENT SEEMS TO BE MOVING
US IN THE RIGHT IN THE RIGHT
WAY.
THANK YOU.
ANYTHING ELSE?
IF NOT, CAN I HAVE A MOTION TO
ADJOURN PLEASE MOTIONS I JOHN
ANY DISCUSSION ALL IN FAVOR.
THANK YOU.
WE ARE ADJOURNED